Have you had a chance to read or to look at
The Elizabeth Bishop letters?
I have them, but I haven't had a chance to look at them.
They're just wonderful, of course.
No, I have them.
I have them at home.
In fact, I did an interview with Mr. Giroux a couple of weeks ago.
Would you like coffee?
Some coffee?
Oh, yes, I would.
I'd like coffee.
Oh, thank you.
I wonder, you know, she... There are some parallels, I think, in perhaps a superficial way, but really, in terms of this work ethic and this... The woman produced maybe 80 poems, I guess, but she was always striving for that.
And if you read these letters, there's this sense of perfection.
No, I've been really...
I've been waiting to get them to read them, putting everything.
I said some of this in your writing.
Oh, all right.
Do you see where I'm going with this?
I wonder if there's this same passion for precision that... Well, I'm kind of particular.
I mean, I do do a lot of...
That's fine.
I'm just going to direct you to fix it.
I mean, I do do a lot of revising.
I mean, I do do a lot of... You see, I think what it is, in a way, I'm not saying this may not have anything to do with Elizabeth Bishop, but when I first write something down, it's all wrong.
It's almost always wrong.
So I have to do a lot of work.
I mean, there's no way out for me.
Let me just interject what Mr. Giroux said about Elizabeth.
He said she would be working on a story or a poem and do five or six versions and say it's all wrong.
There you are.
He said some of these stories which he gathered in the collected prose should
Everyone was brilliant.
Good to see what was wrong.
That could be true for her.
My feeling is that I don't get it right.
It takes me time.
Therefore, I do do a lot of work on it.
I am after something.
What is it that, I mean, is it the language or that?
No, it's like, it's not, you write something down and you write it, you write maybe half a story or a third of it or a page or a paragraph and you haven't said what you mean.
So there's two things.
There's meaning that you don't have right, you know, you're going to hear all about John Cage on that.
It's not that everybody has to do that.
Some people get it right.
So there's two things.
There's the meaning, and if you don't get the meaning right, you're missing the meaning.
I have to get the meaning right.
I have to be true to what I'm thinking about.
And then as far as the writing is concerned, it's closely related.
you know, I'm using the wrong words, maybe that's why, that's why my meaning isn't coming, isn't right.
Well, we're talking about meaning now, we're talking about what I think is true, what I think is right, what I think is wrong.
Is this story for you
an expression of meaning, or is it a story?
Where do we start?
Oh, so they're a little bit different.
I mean, mostly they start with, most stories start with someone saying something, with some resonant paragraph or sentence or something like that.
With one of your two ears, you're saying.
Yeah, one of my, right, yeah, I read about my ears, yeah.
And it usually starts like that, and then I, um,
And then what happens after that is usually I put it down and don't look at it again for a while.
For like a while?
Well, it depends.
I mean, I might not look at it for a year or I might not look at it for a day.
But then when I go on... Also, I'm sure there's a comment on most writers.
I don't really...
I don't know what direction I'm going in exactly.
So when I say it's not true to a meaning, it's hard to answer that, because if I don't know where I'm going, how do I know my meaning is wrong?
But still, that's the way it is.
Except with that.
And this, at the beginning of the new collection, which is three collections actually, you point out that somewhere around 1954 or 55, something happened.
Right.
And I wonder if you could maybe expand a little bit on that.
Well, one of the things that happened was I thought I wanted to write some stories.
My kids were, we were just talking about how old my kids were.
They were about six or something like that, seven.
And I just felt that I wanted to write more, write seriously in a sense.
Although I'd always written poems very seriously, but with no idea that I was going to ever publish them or anything.
I mean, I had published about three poems when I was about 20.
And then I never did again.
But I always wrote.
But I felt I had to do something.
I'm curious.
You felt you had to.
I'll tell you why in a minute.
I felt I had to do something for two reasons.
A very material reason, in a sense, was that I was about to be pressed
into becoming a film editor.
My husband wanted to film.
I don't think I would have told that whole story, but anyway.
It was about to be, and I really didn't want to.
I didn't want to do anything like that, you know.
And I began to think about stories, and somebody, a friend of ours, read a story to us, and I thought, why don't I write a story?
Now, I had tried to write a story many years before, and
in a class at NYU, and he told me I didn't know how to write and I couldn't do it.
So I said, okay, I don't know how, so I won't.
So that's one part of it.
At the same time, I had become very interested in women's lives.
I was not only interested, I began to be very upset about it.
I really began to worry about it a lot.
This was in relation to the men I knew, you know, and what I felt their attitudes had been, and all these boys I had loved really.
I'm not talking about lovers.
I mean, my husband and his friends.
I love these guys.
But I really love these guys.
I've lived in army camps.
And I knew some of them from the war.
But I was really, really very distressed about it.
And it was not that I was distressed.
I lived in a village.
and I went to the park with a lot of these women, and they were all single women ahead of them.
I mean, my environment was ahead of the game, so to speak.
There were a lot of single women there, you know, along with kids.
They were very young and dumped.
Single mothers, actually?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's what I mean, single mothers.
A lot of them were divorced.
Some of them had been dumped.
Some of them had been, you know, just went away, did it on their own, you know, whatever it was.
But they were along with children, a lot of them.
So they were very interesting to me, and their children were, too.
But this kind of distress that happens before you write something, which I think everybody describes in some way like that.
And I thought I'd write about lip.
I thought I'd start writing some of these stories.
At the same time, I thought, you know, nobody will be interested.
It's just about a bunch of women, and nobody will be that interested.
I've described that in court, because the 50s was a very masculine period in literature.
I'm trying to find if there's any other writer doing here.
the stories that you're doing.
I can't think of anybody offhand at that time.
Well, Phileosa's book came out in 1960, Tell Me a Riddle.
She's written that.
I mean, strictly from a woman's sensibility?
Yeah, well, yeah.
I haven't read Phileosa.
Oh, you should.
Oh, you read Tell Me a Riddle.
You know Tell Me a Riddle?
Oh, you'll die of weeping.
But it's really a back, it's a back, it's a, in a way, just like my, the first story I wrote was Goodbye and Good Luck, and it was not about my generation.
It was about my, it came, it was not the true story, but it was about this, these spinster ants who floated through both my life and my husband's life, you know, all these, these ants who never married and who were really,
And dealt with a small amount of contempt for that reason.
So I went back first before I went forward.
But I worried a lot anyway about whether it wouldn't be considered too trivial and so on.
But I really had a lot of pressure to do it.
So I did it.
And I thought, well, what the hell?
Internal pressure.
Nobody else.
There was no pressure from anyone.
My husband liked the idea of me.
My former husband.
But he liked the idea of me writing stories, because he didn't mind poetry so much.
I mean, he really didn't think it was so great.
He didn't hate it.
He was in music.
Music was his thing, and film.
But he encouraged me.
He said, why don't you write some stories, for God's sake?
with the idea that you'd published them, or was it more or less... Well, it was two things.
It was also that he knew I wrote anyway.
So it was one, encouraging me to write, and then saying, you know, someone might bring them in one of them.
Well, you tell the story about Kim McCormick, that's quite a story.
Well, that's the most lesser thing that happened.
I mean, I would never have... I can't imagine that I would have...
that what has happened to me would have happened to me without Ken.
You want me to tell it on you?
Sure, sure.
I mean, because you know it already, so should I tell it?
Yeah, let me help.
She doesn't know it.
I do.
Oh, you do?
She doesn't.
Oh, okay.
Well, what happened is I used to have these kids, you know, my children's friends, and so were these two children, a little girl and a little boy, both older than my kids,
And they would come in to look at television.
And their mother lived down the way.
And she was divorced from their father.
And we were a little mad at him.
And he would come sometime.
He'd come on Fridays to take them for the weekend.
And we lived really in a basement then.
So in my eyes, what I remember is this dark basement.
Really, really dark.
And these little kids.
Yeah.
Isn't that an earthquake?
The building feels like it's shaking, does it?
I'm sorry.
It's like an earthquake.
It is, look.
It's not an earthquake.
Look, the building's shaking.
Maybe there's a subway that goes out to you.
Maybe what?
Everybody's saying maybe, but they don't know.
This man doesn't know shit.
He's just talking.
It's still shaking.
But maybe... Can we work a little bit?
Yes.
Great.
Well, so anyway, he came in and he sat down in our armchair and these little kids have these very heavy
earphones on because my husband didn't want to hear the television.
So there were four of them sitting there.
And then he finally looks at me rather starkly and says, my Tibby, he didn't say my wife, Tibby says that you've written three stories and I should read them.
This has never happened today, I can tell you.
So I said, really?
Okay.
Are you sure you want to read me?
I'll read them.
So he took them and he read them.
And the next week when he came for the kids, he said, if you write seven more, I'll publish a book.
Isn't that wonderful?
I mean, it was the most wonderful thing that could have ever happened.
Yeah.
And if it hadn't happened, I don't know if I would have written a book.
I might have written another two stories.
Are you probably would have written and they would be someplace in a desk drawer?
Well, not only that, he also said something very important to me, which showed how much he knew.
He said, we'll publish the book.
Don't worry about that.
It gave me some pittance of a— This is it, by the way.
Oh, it is.
Oh, I love that book.
Whenever I see it, I want to cry.
I've had it for ten years.
Oh, that's nice.
So you can see I'm a man.
I see.
That's great.
I'm going to ask you to sign it before we do it.
Okay, yeah.
No, that book is very touching.
So he said, but nobody will publish the stories.
You'll send them out, but you'll see they won't be published.
Why did he suppose he felt that way?
He knew something I didn't know, because I promptly began to send them out.
They promptly began coming back from every magazine you could think.
I mean, you would have think the kind of magazine that commentary was at that time.
When my last book came out, it had like a six-page attack on me.
But at the time, you'd think they would have taken goodbye and good luck.
I mean, those stories seem so natural.
Send them back without a fuzzy word or maybe try it again.
There wasn't a magazine that took them.
And finally, finally...
Do you think you were saying things to people that these editors didn't want to hear?
Well, to me, I can't think.
If I tell you that, well, the stories were Goodbye and Good Luck, the contest.
Wonderful stories.
And one other, it was either a woman, young and old, or The Loudest Voice.
I mean, that's such a kosher story.
Did you ever think that you were a pioneer?
No.
I thought the New Yorkers would love The Loudest Boys.
I mean, I remember sending this out in 1958 or something.
So he was right, that's all.
But I wasn't worried, because I was getting a book out, so I was not in despair or anything.
And I was sort of amazed that he knew so much, you know.
He knew.
But then I began to send him to Quarterly, a little bit, and Accent took the Blind Good Luck and the Contest right off the bat.
They took it.
And that was a magazine at the University of Illinois.
So I also, you know, when I would once in that tenure see those guys,
Parker Quinn and a couple of other, Dan, I forgot his name.
I think about that.
But those two were taken.
When you, there was a piece in the review on the Times, a little sidebar, and you recorded it saying, well, don't ask me anymore about the novel.
I'm not, I'm going to ask you anyway.
Well, I love, oh, there's one thing Ken did, and it's very funny, many years later when I met him, he heard me talk
He had something I was talking about, you know, and I said that I'd been asked to run a novel.
He came up to me later.
He said, we made a bad mistake doing that.
I'm very serious.
We made a bad mistake, Grace.
We made a bad mistake?
He meant he, we, he meant Doubleday, I guess.
I don't know, because they said to me, now write a novel.
And I'd been very obedient at that point.
So you would have, you think?
I did.
I worked.
I didn't do stories.
I did a novel.
I worked on a novel for two years at least, maybe more.
And it wasn't good.
I mean, at least the only good thing about me is that I had brains enough to know that it was crummy.
Where is it?
Well, I used parts of it in different stories.
Some of it, some of it, um...
I'm trying to remember exactly what parts I used, but I did use some things in different stories.
But most of it I just threw out.
I didn't keep it.
Too bad.
No, it was real.
You know, I'm not joking.
It was very imitative, and as I said, I still don't know what it was imitative of, but it was so...
It was like I'd lost my ear, my voice, as well as my brain.
Now, what is it?
Is there a problem for you in writing a novel?
Or are you just so comfortable with the story form?
Well, since I've been writing poems for such a long time, I was sort of used to coming to the end of something in my own lifetime, you know?
So when I began to write stories, I was...
coming, I was finishing them, you know.
Even though some of them took me a year, I mean, it was not that I was finishing them fast, but I could anticipate finishing them.
And so I think I, and then once I had the success of, not the worldly success, but the personal success of actually finishing two stories, I really liked performing right away a lot.
I just had my shoes up tight suddenly.
Are you surprised at all by the response that people have to your stories?
Do you write for other people?
Do you write fundamentally for yourself?
I write, I think, for myself.
I mean, I write from whatever is really distressing me.
Every now and then, I'll write something for somebody.
Or because something they've done...
sort of inspired me, so to speak.
I mean, I have a story called, um, um, well, I don't know, Toy Inventor, and I really wrote it for this guy, you know, but that's, uh, because that's the way he was.
I noticed a change.
I mean, your collections are very neatly.
You had one in 59, and then there was one in 74, I guess, and then 85.
Yeah, right.
And, uh,
do they reflect for you changes in American life or your life?
Well, in my life, I mean, I think in the last one, I've begun, when I, in the first book, I'm really sticking very close to home, you know, and I think by the third book, I've traveled a little bit, you know, and I've gone to China, and I have a couple of stories about China, related to China.
And I've been in different places, you know, and I've been politically much more active than I was in the 50s, although I was sort of a typical political, lesbian type kid, you know.
And in the 50s, I was very involved in...
You know, in education, and things around education, I remember this, because I was eating lunch, supper with some people last night, and I remember that
They first knew me when I was sitting down at an air raid drill stand in the school system, which was in the 50s.
So I must have been doing something then.
I forgot that I was doing something, but I must have been.
And I was, you know, I was in the PTA, and that was my best organization.
I loved it.
Now, you've been very...
active politically, and I assume that you've gotten angry at things.
Does that anger ever find its way?
Well, I write, I mean, the business about women I wrote because I was so angry, but I didn't.
They don't read like angry stories.
No, no.
The voices are real, and the language is wonderful humor.
Humor you can't help if you've got it.
It's interesting what you said.
I'll give you an example.
I was in Germany last year, and with me was called The Face of America, so they had a black, white, a tan, and a woman.
an old woman, a young woman, and a Native American woman.
And this Native American woman told the story of the Cherokee Trail of Tears, you know, from the point of view of somebody there.
She told it very straight, and a man got up in a fury and was saying, why aren't you more angry?
She said, but I told you the story and you're angry.
And therefore you've succeeded at the job.
Yeah, that's what I think you're supposed to do.
You're supposed to, not to me, I mean, you do in a way or in a poem or something.
You're not supposed to prove to the world how angry you are.
You're supposed to allow people to get angry, worried, or upset.
You're out of the picture already.
Now you've said in other interviews that Bates is not yourself, per se.
Yeah.
But of course there are resonances, I guess.
Sure.
I've allowed her to have one or two of my experiences.
But how do you decide when it's going to be a faith story?
I sometimes am totally undecided, and it's only later that I decide it may as well be a faith story.
And some of them I'm not sure.
Do you have these voices?
Yeah.
I mean, mostly the first person or even faith or...
Well, they're not great stories if it's an interest in life as an Irish woman or something like that, or a black woman.
Obviously not.
Or an old woman, you know.
Did you sense at all that, I think I started with the question, that you were a pioneer, that you were pioneering in form?
No, you don't, I didn't think I was a pioneer because I didn't know the women's movement was coming.
I mean, you know, I mean, I, uh,
They're certainly out front.
Yeah, but my feeling was that I was really, no, I mean, my feeling now is that we were, what was happening in the 50s was, in late 50s, early 60s, we were just accumulating drops that would make a way, you know, but we didn't know there were drops in anything.
I mean, I didn't.
Many people, I knew by the end of my first book,
I knew I was a feminist, but I didn't know I was a feminist when I started.
Really?
Yeah.
I was a socialist kid.
At what point did you realize, I mean, I don't even know if that phrase had any concerns.
No, no, you wouldn't say that even.
You wouldn't say you were offended.
And I'm sure it would have been treated, you know, as a subversive kind of thing.
Well, no, we were thinking, I did this reading last night at the Manhattan Theater Club, and a lot of, not just old friends my age, a few of them were there, because I live in Vermont now, I don't see people so much.
But also there were a lot of young women, or no longer that young, that I had worked with at the end of the 70s and early 80s in some women's things, the Women's Pentagon Action, and the first eco-feminist conference I think that was ever held in 79.
And we were talking about that.
I mean, when you know what you are, and...
And the different, the struggles we had with the organizations we were in.
I mean, like the Love of War Resisters League.
To me, they're this secular pacifist organization.
They're the only ones.
All the others are religious.
They're secular, so I've always liked them a lot.
But when we began to organize women, everybody there was very offended.
They were feeling for her.
So it was a struggle to show people that that was okay.
Not only was that good, but it brought women who would never pay any attention to that stuff.
I suppose as a writer of fiction, you have to really guard against allowing...
your writing to become politicized in any way.
Well, you do, but you have to also, I mean, I think most American, a lot of American writers censor themselves.
They're so afraid of it.
I mean, if you were a Latin American writer or a text, you know, you wouldn't think twice about being political.
I mean, you know.
I don't.
My feeling, though, is when you get somebody like Wright or Bertrand Russell or Solzhenitsyn, when the politics starts to take over the fiction, it feels very boring, don't you think?
Yeah, but that's different.
That's just bad writing at that point.
I mean, that's where Solzhenitsyn has to go into all the, you know,
I mean, you have to let your characters live.
I think the point is, in American life, people try not to be political.
I mean, I think that's what happens.
They censor it out.
I would rather, on the political side, just out of sheer pissiness.
What was the word again?
Pissiness.
Otherwise I'll spend a half an hour trying to get that word.
I would rather do it for that reason.
You know, I've always said, you know, I mean, who's in charge of, you know, who's the boss in charge of beauty?
You know, we don't know until later.
Who do you read?
I read anybody that I usually get their book.
No, but I've read, I've been reading, well, I just read a book that's going to come out, Howard Roman's book called The Bird Artist, which,
It's a beautiful little daughter, and I just finished the English Patient, and I just, before that I read, what did I read?
Ceremony by Leslie Sokol.
Oh, you must read the Native American writers.
They're very, they're really terrific.
I mean, we were in great times, except for the people that are being killed all over the world.
But I mean, we live in times where all these different people are really speaking out, speaking up.
It's really quite exciting.
Do you think that the state of fiction, as you say, would increase?
I think it's vigorous.
And the younger ones coming along?
Yeah, I mean, they're writing different.
I mean, some of them are writing very naturalistically, but very few.
Most of the Native American writers, like Leslie Silco, or I'm trying to think of a couple of other names.
But they really, they, um...
They've used every technique that's been developed, you know, that people have been using in terms of jumping around and, you know, standing on their heads.
I mean, they're quite unafraid.
How is your work?
And Chicano writers, too.
And you know what?
They're getting a much wider readership.
They are.
And they're helping the readership.
They're helping readers.
people who might not need to become readers.
All you have to do is go into a high school or something like that, as I've done, and try to work with kids.
I was invited to this high school as a writer, right?
So they were doing one of my stories, and they liked it.
They said good things, and they learned from it.
Then I read them one of Sandra Cisneros' stories.
In 15 minutes, all these Spanish kids were writing stories about sitting on the stoop, you know, what happened, and the mother came, and the sister's boyfriend.
They said, oh, you know, oh, that's how it's done.
It's great.
You enjoy working with young people, I guess, and helping them.
I have enjoyed it.
How do you...
I mean, do you coach or do you teach?
No, I don't coach.
I don't edit.
I mean, it's not even an editor.
I mean, some people edit a lot.
I mean, really great teachers.
Like Donald Bartholomew is a great teacher.
And he did a lot of, you know, like, is he bad?
Is he bad?
But he was a very, very fine teacher.
But I just have people read aloud a lot.
That's fine.
talk to each other, and then I sit with them and look at the stories.
I love the line, you have big luck and little luck.
Yeah.
Again, you pick up little phrases.
One of your stories, I loved it.
I had to write it down.
I have no complaints worth troubling the management about it.
It comes right off, you absolutely hear somebody in the streets of New York City coming out of the line like that.
And I guess everything, you know, everything you've heard people say, more or less.
Yeah, that's true.
That's about a rapture story, right?
Yeah, exactly.
I love writing that.
I like it.
But, I mean, you must really hear these voices.
I lived on 15th Street, right in the mouths of those people.
So, that is very good.
You're up in Vermont.
I'm in New York.
wonderful city.
I just gave a lecture in New York last week at the public library.
I always have a chance to... Oh, that's great.
I gave one of the four-time lectures.
Really?
On what?
My old book.
Oh, yeah?
Where do you get your inspiration for stories?
I mean, I guess it's with you.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
No, it's... I mean, suddenly you understand there's a story someplace in it, but...
So then I might start writing it, but then I'm usually stuck a lot.
Do you really labor over every word?
I can't say I labor over it, but I read aloud.
I like to read aloud, and I hear when things are wrong.
So that's the poet.
Yeah, so I hear it, and it's probably easier for me to know I've been wrong than somebody who just reads.
You know, your eyes are very speedy.
You had a blog in poetry a couple of years ago, I think.
I do, yeah.
That must have been a nice feeling, huh?
I loved it, yeah.
Sometimes I read, in certain places they ask me to just read poems.
And I like that.
I like to do that.
I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
The stories really absolutely do speak for themselves.
I just wonder, do you see an evolution in your own progress as a writer?
I love having a collection like this where they really do span.
Yeah.
I'm sort of scared to look at it even now.
Are you really?
Well, I'm just, I'm sort of scared to get too much of an idea of what I'm about, you know what I mean?
I don't know why, but I don't know that I want to.
I was scared to put it together.
I mean, I thought, you know, what's that saying, period, you know?
But that was both insolent, and I'm glad I did it now, because it's really, it's made me feel more open in a way, which surprises me, to what comes next.
Were you tempted to tinker with any of the stories?
No, that I tried not to do.
Just maybe two or three places I changed the line, because I'd been reading the story a lot, and I noticed...
that I stumbled on those lines.
If you stumble on a line and you read the story about half a dozen times even, you made a mistake.
Something's wrong.
So those are the only places.
I didn't think it was right to change an idea.
Especially something that represented you in the 1950s.
That's right.
Why should I?
Because I was mad at all the people who changed things.
I was especially mad at Auden for changing whole poems that I had memorized.
That's funny.
Well, Henry James, when he brought out the New York edition, he wouldn't have any changed.
He was writing the prefaces, and he was looking at the things.
I mean, completed work should be completed work, don't you think?
Yeah, no, I mean, I have certain essays I did that,
I wish I had done a little better, so I might change those if they ever come out.
But I know I did the best I could with these stories.
I don't have the confidence that they're all great or anything like that, but I know that every one of them, I did the best.
And then I therefore feel like I'd be a jerk.
I'd be silly to change it, not because
I would spoil it, but because it would really be a kind of betrayal to my own past.
Something like that.
That's a nice quote.
I think I get plenty of material.
Would you inscribe these?
Sure I would.
It's in such good shape, I'm scared of writing it.
That's okay.
Where do you want me to write?
Where do you want me to do this?
Here?
Yeah, you can just sign this one and maybe inscribe this one.
I should just sign it?
Yeah, maybe that's okay.
All right.
Should I say the date or anything?
No, just leave it like that.
Oh, that's more pristine.
And then you can write anything you'd like.
That's great.
May I?
Yeah.
That's okay.